You know, you amazed me, Jim.
We're talking about James Lee, Birth and Boston.
And what's this now, the sixth, what was the show?
The series.
Yeah.
Does it get harder for you or does it get easier?
It's always just a day at a time.
I never measured it.
In terms of being a continuing character, a literary character, I mean, there are any number of continuing characters in American fiction.
No, I just write the story that's in my mind when I wake up on that day.
You mean in terms of the plot?
Just everything.
I never plan a story.
It's just there.
It's always there.
That's amazing.
Tell me about how this, you've got this neo-Nazi type situation here.
Tell me a little bit about the genesis of this.
Well, I'm just troubled with that personally by maybe some historical currents that are at work in the country.
It's a difficult time.
Our cities are beset with very serious problems.
Their clients, racial trouble, crime, urban decay as it's called.
And people become tempted sometimes to
seek facile and brutal solutions and those people are in our midst they'd like to wink at the constitution as dave says what tells me most nick is um their voices very strident voices that work today in the country i'm absolutely convinced they have an agenda which
if we allow it to be carried out, will eviscerate our system.
We're talking about the radical right in the United States.
There are basically two Americans.
There always have been two societies that work within our continental shores.
One is humane, indecent, and civilized.
The other is not.
The spirit of vigilantism
has its origins in colonial society.
The America First Committee is a descendant of that more primitive time.
But the essence of vigilanteism is based ultimately on violence and reactionary thinking.
And at frontier times, there's some justification for
They had no legal system, oftentimes on the edge of our society.
Today, we see those descendants of the America First Committee, McCarthy, Harrow, take on another guy.
Sometimes they're televangelists.
Sometimes they're right-wing politicians.
But their objection ultimately is to a pluralistic society.
They cannot abide.
That, in my opinion, is what's going on psychologically.
The egalitarian dream of Jefferson, to which they pay lip service, is actually antithetical to everything they believe in.
But they cannot accept a pluralistic society, one in which gays, blacks, white guys like us, Jews, Catholics, atheists, Orientals, gays, lesbians, women,
all have an equal share.
And that's what the Constitution guarantees.
This is the Jeffersonian society, that all human beings are created equal in the society of God and underneath the governance of our republic.
I think it's important to point out that this is not pandemic any particular region of the country either.
No, it's not a region.
Your novel, your man happens to be in New Iberia, but you're talking about
phenomenon that's everywhere, isn't it?
The temptation is always there.
But the villain we meet in here represents cosmic evil.
His flag might seem to be emblematic of some ideological cause, but he's evil in the corner.
But in our own system, we always have that temptation, that moment to listen to the demagogue when we're angry or when we're fearful.
And that's what Dave becomes concerned with in the book.
We can always recognize Nazis.
He invited somebody who's ugly and stupid with a shaved head and a swastika on his arm.
There's a signal there.
He's fairly recognized.
But then you have a guy like David Duke who cleans up his act and gets cosmetic surgery and fixes his teeth and puts on a suit and talks.
I mean, the transparency, the superficial one, they just want to come.
But I wonder if that's the more nefarious... Well, that kind of fellow that is still a little kind of incidental.
to the larger problem, which is historical.
Again, it goes back to what we were talking about just a moment ago.
There are two societies that live symbiotically within our culture and within the pages of our history books.
We're a nation that rebuilt the countries of our enemies after World War II.
We're the same nation that... Can I take that out of your way for you?
Yes, ma'am.
Thanks a million.
the same nation that destroyed Iraq and then left its leader in place, encouraged the Kurds to rebel and then abandoned them, killed perhaps 100,000 civilians.
This was the same nation that had been the ally of the Reagan-Bush administrations, all for one.
If somebody can explain that to me, I believe
be very interested in listening.
Tell me about the fine line that you have to walk.
I mean, as a writer of fiction, whose primary responsibility is to entertain, how do you balance these two?
I mean, you clearly are disturbed by things that you see in society, domestically, and also in international things.
How do you walk the line here to avoid being perceived as a pedantic writer?
Because, I mean, you don't want to become boring either.
Well, art requires craft, finally, whereby we talk about the struggle between good and evil in a way that's interesting and dramatic, and which in some way recreates the oldest story of the Judeo-Christian history.
a tradition which is the fall of man from goodness, the blight that he brought upon this endemic place he was given, and which, for one reason or another, that he tainted through choice.
This is not a biblical sermon, but the allegorical implication there in that early story in the Old Testament
is the plot that makes an all-good tragedy.
It's the source of the Renaissance in Greek tragedy, the fall of the hero, from a lofty and elevated physician to one of humiliation and degradation.
The story of Odysseus, or rather, you know, the blind king who solved the riddle of the Sphinx with his name.
Yeah, the great tragic figure who blinded himself.
You know, it's like the story of Prometheus.
The tragic hero always precipitates his own doom.
Well, the tragic hero always, by the way, is a good, a decent person, too.
Well, he has to be a noble hero.
He always has to be a flawed, doesn't he?
In this book, we meet a character who represents evil on a metaphysical scale.
It seems to be satanic.
It's not a theological book, but the themes are mythic.
It's about the ending of the millennium.
It seems that the forces of good and evil are vying for control of the earth.
Those evil forces are represented by
neo-nazi buckhalter.
But I do believe that there are people at work in our society that have one agenda, that is to destroy our faith in ourselves and in our institutions.
And if we'll listen to them, their voice is always the same.
Trust us.
If we listen to them, we'll get to see what the world of world buckhalter is all about.
As Dave says, these were
These are people who would make the louts, the shaved-head louts, and bully the caretaker of the side.
In the last election, we heard people talking about rounding up the homeless, the struggle for the culture of America, rhetoric, and these televangelists who denigrate
People who are different make scapegoats out of minorities.
Nobody's going to make a scapegoat out of a black person anymore, but a gay becomes a likely and appealing alternative.
Women, illegal immigrants.
And then of course you have the scourge of AIDS, which so many of these people see as almost God's will.
to these people that you're describing.
I mean, this is happening because it's supposed to happen to these people.
Well, that's an interesting thing, how people always take it upon themselves to interpret God's will.
I know.
I have a feeling that the law is tired of having all of these phenomena ascribed to him by people who have trouble
Excuse me, go ahead.
Are these things that profoundly bother you, or are you a writer feeling, you know, looking around out into society and this is what David's going to get involved in at this point, or are you really bothered?
I mean, are these things that you're really responding to as a person first and then as a writer?
Well, it'll bother me after I write about it.
But that's what your art finally is about.
It's the medium for your concern, for your perception about the world in which we live.
Every writer tries to tell the truth.
He knows it.
It's a compulsion.
It's an obsession.
Orwell says the artist has the compulsion to correct history.
Are all your books...
a struggle between good and evil.
Oh, yeah, always.
And tell me about... Do you have to refresh yourself of what he's done and bring yourself... I know there's always a little couple paragraphs in there about what's gone before.
Do you take pains to make sure that one book is consistent from one to the next in terms of the factual stuff for your characters?
Well...
I think of all the books as part of one story.
Oh, really?
Yeah, it's one ongoing story in reality.
So he's going to keep going as long as you keep going?
Well, I don't plan it.
I just always, this is a fact.
I get up in the morning with the story, and it's there.
And I know what I'll be writing about that day, and I don't know what
I'll be writing about tomorrow.
Within the confines of the same book.
Yeah, but... You didn't know where this was going when you started?
No.
But you knew vaguely that you had this larger theme that you would be doing.
I just started with the submarine, the Nazi sub, sunk off the Louisiana coast.
It's all that was in my mind.
And I started it before the political campaign of 92.
And I was bothered by things I was hearing.
I was bothered by... I really believe it.
I believe, like, right now, you see what... Bill Clinton won the election.
And people who had had access to power, to the White House, to media attention that was beyond their wildest imaginings, found themselves ostracized.
They're filled with rage.
Also, they see society becoming, our society, becoming truly egalitarian.
It makes them grind their back teeth.
They're filled with anger.
And they're going to, in effect, rescind that election if they can.
And they have no issue to run on except to degrade those whom they fear.
I've never seen anything like this.
You can tell me not in my large time.
I did an interview with Gary Wills a couple of weeks ago, and he said, hey, it's always been like this.
He said, they called Lincoln an ape.
They accused Washington of trying to institute, make himself a king, and Jefferson was accused of being an adulterer with a black slave and blah, blah, blah.
But this is pretty vicious.
This stuff, this white water thing is a nothing issue.
Paula Jones is a bimbo wannabe.
Where she's coming from is beyond me.
These people on television, there's Pat Robertson, there's a particularly female president.
What the hell are they?
I mean, I think you're absolutely right.
I think that this is, you know, one way to avoid getting these programs in.
All of his positions, I guess, are under attack.
And whether or not he's going to make it as arguable.
We'll see.
I don't know.
They wish to destroy the man.
He's everything they detest.
Number one, he comes from a blue-collar background.
He became a Yale law graduate.
He's educated.
He's a Rhodes scholar.
They despise intellectuals, particularly one who rises from his background into circles of power, in which they consider him their bailiwick.
And he has an intelligent, assertive life, too.
Well, there's stuff they can't accept.
of our woman attorney general.
I'm sorry.
Can I give you any coffee, cappuccino, espresso?
Nothing.
I'm not for me, ma'am.
No, I appreciate it.
Thank you, ma'am.
You're welcome.
But I think that's what's at work.
And if these people had their work, we would not have the kind of society we have today.
We would have one in which a few people had voice.
A few people would have a voice.
And it would be one in which a discrepancy between the haves and the have-nots would be even more dramatic than it is now.
This is what the Reagan era was about.
It was about rescinding all the social gains of the last 50 years.
turning back the clock, reallocating the capital.
That's what went on.
I remember a quote, I can't recall where it came from before.
Reagan made people feel comfortable about their business.
What a wonderful observation that was.
I lost my train here for something.
Pick up on anything while I'm thinking of you.
The novel deals with the situation in Louisiana, but it's meant to be a treatment of our times, of our era, and their millennial themes.
The preacher we meet.
The preacher's a character, isn't he?
Yeah, he's an interesting guy who believes that maybe some evil force
is being released upon the earth.
And he mentions the prophecy in the Book of Revelation and the prophecy about God, G-O-G, and Magog out of the Old Testament.
And, of course, that millennial fear is characteristic in the Western world whenever we reach even the end of the century and certainly the end of the millennia in the literature of the
end of the 11th century, people began to see all kinds of signs.
Things were ending.
Of course, we stumbled on for a hundred thousand years.
Tell me a little bit about, I mean, they told me this, I think the first printing here is 75,000, which is great.
Yeah, it's been very successful.
And each one is more successful than the previous one, I guess.
This one's a big one.
Yeah, it hit the Publishers Weekly bestseller list last year.
Oh, congratulations.
That's nice.
Did you see USA Today?
No.
He put my picture in the paper two days running.
Yeah, there's a big spread.
Wow.
It's today?
Yeah, yesterday ended.
Well, I'll pick it up.
I picked it up.
Yeah.
Really, that's great.
Yeah, it's a big spread.
Time Magazine is doing a spread, I think, next week.
Well, how does that make you feel for a guy that, I mean, you want to look really from one extreme to the next.
I mean, I forget the number, but you had a book that was rejected by, what, 50 or 60?
Oh, it was 100.
It was 100 publishers.
Can I get a check, man, whenever you have time?
Thanks.
Now you've got a book on the bestseller list.
Yeah.
Tell me a little bit.
I mean, is there wisdom to be gained here?
I mean, is popularity a fleeting kind of a thing?
I mean, are you writing that differently from the way you did with the book?
Well, I think the writing is better today.
The themes are larger and I'm older.
But fashion and success are fickle companions.
Do you hear from readers?
Oh, a lot, yeah.
Do they respond to a tough theme like this?
Oh, yeah.
Negatively?
I mean, you know, I get hundreds of fan letters, and they're wonderful.
That's why I get a strange letter, but it's rare.
You live in Louisiana?
And Missoula, yeah.
I remember when you were up in Montana.
Yeah, that's right.
And...
Chuck, I mean, picking the place.
I mean, you've lived all over the country.
Is Louisiana a metaphor for anything?
Or how important is a place like Louisiana in your writing for you?
Well, it's a place I love to write about, Nick.
It's a place I'm closest to.
But a good story, a good novel, is going to use the place...
only as a symbol for the territory in which every man, the medieval protagonist, lives.
The moral landscape doesn't have anything of geographic singularity about moral landscapes in the heart.
Thank you, ma'am.
You're welcome.
What is Dave for you?
Is Dave a character or has he alone?
Maybe you could just tell me what Dave is for you.
Does Dave grow with you as a character?
I mean, he's certainly not fixed in time like so many of the other continuing characters that you see.
to have an organic experience.
He's growing and he's living and things are happening from book to book.
Tell me a little bit about him.
I mean, the obvious question, do you see him as an expression of yourself or an ideal self?
Does he represent the things that you'd like to be?
Tell me just a little bit about him as a character.
Well, he's the chivalric protagonist and he's a decent and kind person.
And he tries to give voice to those who are disenfranchised, those who are politically powerless to the poor, those who are vulnerable and inept.
And ideally, that's what a police officer does.
But he feels charged to befriend those who are less fortunate than he.
And that, in essence, is the ethos of the night he ran.
the medieval figure out of the charles syrian legend um and then of course his pal cleat cleat see the last shades of good at that there i mean he's actually
He's basically the Gordian Knot kind of a guy.
He does all those things.
I don't know my room number yet.
That's quite all right.
I can just find out and talk.
That's the last name Burke?
Yes, ma'am.
Excellent.
There's no problem.
Thank you very much.
I sure appreciate it.
No problem.
Thank you.
We're talking about cleat, I guess, and his function as, I guess, a foil for... Yeah.
Going back to your observation earlier about the energy from coming, the similarities with Greek tragedy.
Greek tragedy always assumed or always purported that life, we lived by such a slender thread, so fragile.
And we see this with the tenuous, for instance.
I mean, there are no certainties in life.
They go from day to day and understanding this.
And I guess you energize the novel, your novels, with this understanding of the fragility of life, I guess.
Well, Dave's always aware of mortality.
Mortality is another way of saying it.
And the evil characters whom he encounters always are invested in greed.
They're driven by greed.
And greed is our way of denying more talent.
Materialism can only be validated by denial of our deaths.
And the most terrible moment of recognition for a venal person is the fact that, in truth, he cannot take it with him.
I love what Earl K. Long once said about his lack of desire for money, because he never cared about it.
He said,
If I go to heaven, I won't need it.
If I go to the other place, it'll burn up.
I guess when you're motivated by considerations of the grand things, good and evil, it certainly does, whereas traditional
P.I.
kinds of books.
I mean, they don't take on such weighty things, do they?
I mean, they're not novels.
This is a traditional, you write traditional novels.
Dave's never a P.I.
He's never a P.I., but I mean, isn't that kind of a, that's what they call him, a P.I.
It's a crime novel, but you see, the novels I've written over the years, and I wrote my first book,
publishable novel in 1960, you know, 34 years ago.
I never changed subjects.
All I changed was the voice.
Dave Robichaux, police officer, narrates the books in the series, but the subject has never changed.
The same theme, same character, same places were always there.
My first novel dealt with a black
Prizefighter ends up in a penitentiary and a white moonshiner who becomes his friend and a country singer addicted to speed.
I wrote that when I was 23 years old.
Is that the one that you had difficulty placing on the house?
No, it only took me four years.
Four years?
That's kind of like a breeze for me.
The Lost Get Back Boogie dealt with a guy who was being released from Angola Pen.
who goes up to Montana and gets involved, and I'll fight with a company that's polluting the Missoula Valley.
And that would be rejected just around 100 times over a nine-year period.
It never occurred to you that maybe you should be doing something else?
I never thought I could.
What does that keep you going with those sorts of things?
It was very frustrating, but I could never imagine myself not riding.
I couldn't do something else.
So I did other things to make a living.
And I enjoyed most of them.
But I knew I wasn't working at what I was supposed to do, which was to write.
I never had a doubt about what I was supposed to be doing.
And you never changed your own expression.
You didn't say, well, gee, maybe I'm not appealing to the... I guess this...
This raises a question.
Do you see a reader out there?
Do you have a reader in line?
No.
No, it's just like pitching.
You think the ball into the catcher's clock.
And if you miss the strike zone, it's because you're not thinking the ball into the catcher's clock.
And ours is the same one.
That's a great quote.
Yeah.
I'm looking for these good quotes.
That's a good question.
Thank you.
What's our schedule?
I've got another interview.
I've got two more.
I've got one and three.
Okay, so we've got about 15 minutes.
Yeah, yeah.
Maybe... Just in case there are any questions.
Okay.
So again, we were talking about when Dave started.
I mean, has your success surprised you?
Yeah.
I made failure a way of life so long I felt comfortable.
Do you have any insight?
I mean, is the public fickle, or does it just, how can, maybe it wasn't the public, maybe it was the publishing houses that wouldn't give you a shot, you know?
Is there a comment to be made there?
It becomes eventually a fella's time.
That's what happens.
It's your time.
It's just your time.
I had a lot of success when I was younger, but it went away from me.
But there's just a time when it happens.
Maybe the best writer in the country is Ron Hanson, and it's going to be Ron Hanson's time.
Ron Hanson is like Babe Ruth standing in the middle of Yankee Stadium.
And some people see him, but most of the crowd hasn't.
One day they will.
It's like Cormac McCarthy.
Cormac's a great writer.
He's on the bestseller list.
He used to sell 4,000 copies for years.
I don't know Hanson's work.
Marriott in Ecstasy is his last book.
Story of the Nun with the Stigmata.
Maybe the best writer working in America today.
You feel that?
Yeah.
Who's he with?
Who's his publisher?
Do you know offhand?
Good question.
I don't know.
Let me also ask you.
Now, I know you've written non-Dave books, but are you basically a Dave?
but you say that you're writing gay books pretty much from now on?
Well, I don't know.
I write, I publish short stories and essays during the year, but nobody reads them.
Never going to live, right?
I guess there's a comment that you made here.
I think that maybe you can find
a medium, a way of expressing what you feel with this character.
Maybe you don't have to go and come up with that.
Oh, I'm very happy with the books.
I believe they're the best books I've written.
I really think these are the books I was always meant to write.
They've had obvious influences on people.
People come to signings and say that the books help them with, you know, with recovery.
help them find 12-step groups, and there are not many authors who receive that kind of reward from their work.
You're pretty open about your own, and it's kind of, you're not supposed to talk about that, right, I guess, in 12 Steps and all this.
Well, people in my fellowship are asked us not to represent the organization by name at the level of media, so we refer to it as simply a 12-step fellowship.
But I mean, you have no reservations about... To be personally?
No, not at all.
About talking about it.
Oh, no.
And writing about it.
No, of course not.
Is it true?
I did an interview with Elia Kazan a couple of years ago.
He said, Jim, you write about yourself, either fictionally or... You make yourself naked.
You expose yourself to the world.
Yeah.
Do you feel similarly, I mean, that when you actually sit down the way, honestly, you really do have to expose the wounds, I guess.
I don't know if I'm fixing my metaphors.
No, that's right.
If that's the case, it certainly doesn't bother me.
But I think that kind of sensitivity, with all respect to these other gentlemen, is based a little bit on a vain misperception.
Because nobody's really watching us.
We think they're watching us, but people are not watching us.
They're worried about their own lives, as they should be.
And there's nothing any of us is capable of telling the rest of the human family about that is very near.
When you say that these are all part of one work, it's a corpus, obviously.
So Dave is going...
Someplace where you don't know where he's going.
No, no I don't.
I never do.
And when it concludes, do you think it will be a terminus or does he terminate with you?
I never, I just never have an idea where the story's going.
I just don't know.
I never see him into the next day.
For instance, when his first wife died so viciously, I think.
I mean, a lot of people might be... Of course, you have to give them this baggage.
They carry this baggage in pain.
But when you kill off a character like that, does it bother you?
I mean, personally?
Well, I don't feel that I precipitate the action again.
The story's already written.
And that book, Heaven's Prisoners, was based in part on a violent intrusion into our own lives.
His biographical origin, you see.
And where his current wife and his sweetheart live so tenuously, you almost feel, I mean, a bad diagnosis could come in at any time.
Well, it's true, but it's also something that's been in our lives.
It's not fiction.
I didn't write it out of imagination.
Much of the material is biographical.
So you are really writing novels that are based on things that happen in your own life.
Is this kind of an autobiography in a way?
I don't think of it in that way because very often people will not recognize the experience
because it's portrayed in an oblique fashion.
That's what art is.
It's an oblique expression of events that have already happened in your life.
But you write about them in a medium that redefines reality in such a way that the reader, the viewer, becomes a participant.
He sees himself within this story.
Autobiography becomes a pain exercise.
When writers find themselves writing their memoirs, they enter into the area of the ego as a role rather than into the area of the artist.
Art is empathetic by nature.
The person who writes the journal and the diary begins to use first-person pronouns like 10 feet high.
So is it a pretty good ride for you right now?
Everything's great.
It has been for a long time.
Yeah.
If it all went away tomorrow, I'd still be a very happy person.
Happy man.
I love Phil Crosby's comment on Today Show one day.
The way I look at it is I'm playing with house money.
We're playing on the house money.
Yeah, you know, it's a good line.
I'm playing with house money right now.
Nick, can we start walking?
Yeah, I don't know if this fella is calling.
He's calling.